README.md, before:

# Redcat, category theory concepts in idiomatic Clojure
[![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/uncomplicate/redcat.png)](https://travis-ci.org/uncomplicate/redcat)

Redcat is a Clojure library that implements category theory concepts, such as functors, applicative functors, monads, monoids etc. in idiomatic Clojure.

## Project Goals

* Fit well into idiomatic Clojure - Clojure programmers should be able to use and understand Redcat like any regular Clojure library.
* Fit well into Haskell monadic types conventions - programmers should be able to reuse existing widespread monadic programming literature and easily translate it to Clojure code.
* Be reasonably easy to learn - the code from the existing books, articles and tutorials for learning monadic programming, which is usually written in Haskell should be easily translatable to Clojure with Redcat.
* Offer good performance.

## Instalation & Requirements
FIXME - THIS FILE IS UNDER DEVELOPMENT. VERSION 0.1.0 HAS NOT BEEN RELEASED TO CLOJARS YET. CURRENTLY, YOU CAN ONLY USE REDCAT IF YOU BUILD THE SNAPSHOT F`ROM THE SOURCE.
Add the following dependency to your `project.clj` file:
```clojure
[org.uncomplicate/redcat "0.1.0"]
```

Redcat artifacts are distributed through Clojars, so they will be downloaded by leiningen by default. If you are using other tools for dependency management, you can download Redcat from Clojars.org, or build it from the source by running `lein jar`.

Redcat requires at least Clojure 1.5, since it uses its reducers library.
Reducers use java fork/join, so you have to run it on Java 7+ jdk, or include jsr166y.jar in your project dependencies (see [Clojure's POM] (https://github.com/clojure/clojure/blob/master/pom.xml) for the dependency info).

## Usage

## Get Involved

## Documentation & Examples

## Project Maturity

## License

Copyright © 2013 Dragan Djuric

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License, the same as Clojure

Commit message:

Renamed the project to Fluokitten .

README.md, after:

# Fluokitten - category theory in idiomatic Clojure
[![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/uncomplicate/fluokitten.png)](https://travis-ci.org/uncomplicate/fluokitten)

Fluokitten is a Clojure library that implements category theory concepts, such as functors, applicative functors, monads, monoids etc. in idiomatic Clojure.

## Project Goals

* Fit well into idiomatic Clojure - Clojure programmers should be able to use and understand Redcat like any regular Clojure library.
* Fit well into Haskell monadic types conventions - programmers should be able to reuse existing widespread monadic programming know-how and easily translate it to Clojure code.
* Be reasonably easy to learn - the code from the existing books, articles and tutorials for learning monadic programming, which is usually written in Haskell should be easily translatable to Clojure with Red Cat.
* Offer good performance.

## Instalation & Requirements
FIXME - THIS FILE IS UNDER DEVELOPMENT. VERSION 0.1.0 HAS NOT BEEN RELEASED TO CLOJARS YET. CURRENTLY, YOU CAN ONLY USE RED CAT IF YOU BUILD THE SNAPSHOT FROM THE SOURCE.
Add the following dependency to your `project.clj` file:
```clojure
[org.uncomplicate/redcat "0.1.0"]
```

Redcat artifacts are distributed through Clojars, so they will be downloaded by leiningen by default. If you are using other tools for dependency management, you can download Fluokitten from Clojars.org, or build it from the source by running `lein jar`.

Redcat requires at least Clojure 1.5, since it uses its reducers library.
Reducers use java fork/join, so you have to run it on Java 7+ jdk, or Java 6 with `jsr166y.jar` included in your project dependencies (see [Clojure's POM] (https://github.com/clojure/clojure/blob/master/pom.xml) for the dependency info).

## Usage

`use` or `require` `uncomplicate.fluokitten.core` and `uncomplicate.fluokitten.jvm` in your namespace, and call appropriate functions from the Redcat library.
```clojure
(ns example
  (:use [uncomplicate.fluokitten core jvm]))

(fmap inc [1 2 3])
```

There are a couple of typical ways you would want to use Fluokitten:
* Use the built-in integration that makes clojure core concepts (data structures, functions, etc.) categorical.
* Build your own implementations of the categorical protocols

The place for detailed instructions is [Fluokitten Homepage](http://www.uncomplicate.github.io/fluokitten). I will try to build a comprehensive collection of links to various resources related to category theory in programming (usually related to monads and friends) as well as code examples and instructions on how to do the equivalent stuff in Clojure with Fluokitten.
I assume that the first step for most users would be to just use the stuff built in the library and learn about category theory and related programming concepts. Therefore, most tutorials and literature will be written with that in mindfor now. Until specific tutorials on implementing redcat protocols appear, advanced users may find the documentation in the source code, tests, and the source code itself helpful (I really think it already is).

## Get Involved

I welcome anyone who is willing to contribute, no mather the level of experience. Here are some ways in which you can help:
* If you are a native English speaker, i would really appreciate if you can help with correcting the English on the Fluokitten site and in the  documentation.
* Contribute your example code (your own or the ports from Haskell tutorials) to be added to Fluokitten tests.
* Contribute articles and tutorials.
* Do code review of the Fluokitten code and suggest improvements.
* If you find bugs, report them via [Github issue tracker]

## Documentation & Examples

## Project Maturity

## License

Copyright © 2013 Dragan Djuric

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License, the same as Clojure
