articles/community.md, before:

---
title: "Fluokitten: Community"
layout: article
---

## Mailing List

[Fluokitten has a mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/uncomplicate). Feel free to join it and ask any questions you may have.


## News & Announcements on Twitter

To subscribe for announcements of releases, important changes and so on, please follow [@Uncomplicateorg](https://twitter.com/#!/uncomplicateorg) on Twitter.


## What is Uncomplicate?

Fluokitten is currently the only part of the future group of Uncomplicate libraries.

# Get Involved

I welcome anyone who is willing to contribute, no mather the level of experience. Please contact me through the [Uncomplicate mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/uncomplicate).
 Here are some ways in which you can help:

## Help with the Technical Writing

* If you are a native English speaker, i would really appreciate if you can help with correcting the English on the Fluokitten site and in the  documentation.
* Contribute your example code (your own or the ports from Haskell tutorials) to be added to Fluokitten tests.
* Contribute articles and tutorials.

## Report Issues

* Do code review of the Fluokitten code and suggest improvements.
* If you find a bug, poor default, missing feature or find any part of the API inconvenient, please [file an issue](https://github.com/uncomplicate/fluokitten/issues) on Github.
If possible, try to explain what behavior you expected and why. Bonus points for contributing failing test cases.

## Contribute Code

Fluokitten uses [Leiningen 2](https://github.com/technomancy/leiningen/blob/master/doc/TUTORIAL.md). Make sure you have it installed and then run tests against supported Clojure versions using

    lein midje

Then create a branch and make your changes on it. Once you are done with your changes and all tests pass, submit a pull request on Github.

Commit message:

Added some changes in the getting started text, and an alert with the appeal to help with English on the website.

articles/community.md, after:

---
title: "Fluokitten: Community"
layout: article
---

## Mailing List

[Fluokitten has a mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/uncomplicate). Feel free to join it and ask any questions you may have.

## News & Announcements on Twitter

To subscribe for announcements of releases, important changes and so on, please follow [@Uncomplicateorg](https://twitter.com/#!/uncomplicateorg) on Twitter.

## What is Uncomplicate?

Fluokitten is currently the only part of the future group of Uncomplicate libraries.

# Get Involved

I welcome anyone who is willing to contribute, no mather the level of experience. Please contact me through the [Uncomplicate mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/uncomplicate).
Here are some ways in which you can help:

## Help with the Technical Writing

* If you are a native English speaker, i would really appreciate if you can help with correcting the English on the Fluokitten site and in the  documentation.
* Contribute your example code (your own or the ports from Haskell tutorials) to be added to Fluokitten tests.
* Contribute articles and tutorials.

The source code of the site is [here](https://github.com/uncomplicate/fluokitten/tree/gh-pages). Please fork it on GitHub, make your changes, and issue a pull request, or simply contact us through the mailing list to see what is your preferred means of sending the changes.

### Many thanks to the following people who helped with the technical writing:
* [Chris Rooney](https://github.com/crooney)

## Report Issues

* Do code review of the Fluokitten code and suggest improvements.
* If you find a bug, poor default, missing feature or find any part of the API inconvenient, please [file an issue](https://github.com/uncomplicate/fluokitten/issues) on Github.
If possible, try to explain what behavior you expected and why. Bonus points for contributing failing test cases.

## Contribute Code

Fluokitten uses [Leiningen 2](https://github.com/technomancy/leiningen/blob/master/doc/TUTORIAL.md). Make sure you have it installed and then run tests against supported Clojure versions using

    lein midje

Then create a branch and make your changes on it. Once you are done with your changes and all tests pass, submit a pull request on Github.
