articles/learnyouahaskell.md, before:

---
title: "Fluokitten: Learn You a Haskell for Great Good - in Clojure"
layout: article
---

FIXME - To be written

# Learn You a Haskell for Great Good - in Clojure

This tutorial is a Clojure version of the book [Learn You a Haskell for Great Good](http://learnyouahaskell.com). This article is not self-contained: it is ment to be read side-by-side with the [book](http://learnyouahaskell.com), and used as a commentary and reference for the Clojure version of the examples. Due to the differences in typing, data structures, support for varargs and currying, there are differences in how the concepts that the original article explains are implemented in Haskell and Clojure.

It is recommended that you first read the article [Functors, Applicatives, and Monads in Pictures - in Clojure](/articles/functors_applicatives_monads_in_pictures.html) before reading this article.

To be able to follow along, you'll have to have Clojure installed and Fluokitten library included as a dependency in your project, as described in [Getting Started Guide](/articles/getting_started.html). Obviously, you'll need a reasonable knowledge of Clojure (you don't have to be an expert, though), and being familiar with the basics of Haskell is helpful, but not a necessity. So, after checking out [Getting Started Guide](/articles/getting_started.html), start up Clojure REPL and open this article and the [Learn You a Haskell for Great Good](http://learnyouahaskell.com) book side by side and we are ready to go.

The complete source code of the examples used in this article is available [here](https://github.com/uncomplicate/fluokitten/blob/master/test/uncomplicate/fluokitten/articles/learnyouaheaskell.clj) in the form of [midje](https://github.com/marick/Midje) tests.

## Chapter 7 - The Functor Type Class

## Chapter 11 - Applicative Functors

## Chapter 12 - Monoids

## Chapter 13 - A Fistful of Monads

## Chapter 14 - For a Few Monads More

### Functions as Monads

### Some Useful Monadic Functions

## Conclusion

## Where to Go Next

## Tell Us What You Think!

Please take a moment to tell us what you think about this guide on Twitter or the [Fluokitten community resources](/articles/community)

Let us know what was unclear or what has not been covered. Maybe you do not like the guide style or grammar or discover spelling mistakes. Reader feedback is key to making the documentation better.

Commit message:

A few minor changes in the Tell us what you think section. Added the appeal message to the homepage.

articles/learnyouahaskell.md, after:

---
title: "Fluokitten: Learn You a Haskell for Great Good - in Clojure"
layout: article
---

FIXME - To be written

# Learn You a Haskell for Great Good - in Clojure

This tutorial is a Clojure version of the book [Learn You a Haskell for Great Good](http://learnyouahaskell.com). This article is not self-contained: it is ment to be read side-by-side with the [book](http://learnyouahaskell.com), and used as a commentary and reference for the Clojure version of the examples. Due to the differences in typing, data structures, support for varargs and currying, there are differences in how the concepts that the original article explains are implemented in Haskell and Clojure.

It is recommended that you first read the article [Functors, Applicatives, and Monads in Pictures - in Clojure](/articles/functors_applicatives_monads_in_pictures.html) before reading this article.

To be able to follow along, you'll have to have Clojure installed and Fluokitten library included as a dependency in your project, as described in [Getting Started Guide](/articles/getting_started.html). Obviously, you'll need a reasonable knowledge of Clojure (you don't have to be an expert, though), and being familiar with the basics of Haskell is helpful, but not a necessity. So, after checking out [Getting Started Guide](/articles/getting_started.html), start up Clojure REPL and open this article and the [Learn You a Haskell for Great Good](http://learnyouahaskell.com) book side by side and we are ready to go.

The complete source code of the examples used in this article is available [here](https://github.com/uncomplicate/fluokitten/blob/master/test/uncomplicate/fluokitten/articles/learnyouaheaskell.clj) in the form of [midje](https://github.com/marick/Midje) tests.

## Chapter 7 - The Functor Type Class

## Chapter 11 - Applicative Functors

## Chapter 12 - Monoids

## Chapter 13 - A Fistful of Monads

## Chapter 14 - For a Few Monads More

### Functions as Monads

### Some Useful Monadic Functions

## Conclusion

## Where to Go Next

## Tell Us What You Think!

Please take some time to tell us about your experience with the library and this site. [Let us know](/articles/community.html) what we should be explaining or is not clear enough. If you are willing to contribute improvements, even better!
